It was early in April in the year ’83 that I woke
one  morning  to  find  Sherlock  Holmes  standing,
fully dressed, by the side of my bed. He was a late
riser, as a rule, and as the clock on the mantelpiece
showed me that it was only a quarter-past seven, I
blinked up at him in some surprise, and perhaps
just a little resentment, for I was myself regular in
my habits.
“Very sorry to knock you up, Watson,” said he,
“but it’s the common lot this morning.  Mrs. Hud-
son has been knocked up, she retorted upon me,
and I on you.”
“What is it, then—a fire?”
“No;  a client.  It seems that a young lady has
arrived in a considerable state of excitement, who
insists upon seeing me. She is waiting now in the
sitting-room.   Now,  when  young  ladies  wander
about the metropolis at this hour of the morning,
and  knock  sleepy  people  up  out  of  their  beds,  I
presume that it is something very pressing which
they have to communicate.  Should it prove to be
an interesting case, you would, I am sure, wish to
follow  it  from  the  outset.  I  thought,  at  any  rate,
that I should call you and give you the chance.”
“My dear fellow,  I would not miss it for any-
thing.”
I  had  no  keener  pleasure  than  in  following
Holmes in his professional investigations, and in
admiring  the  rapid  deductions,  as  swift  as  intu-
itions, and yet always founded on a logical basis
with which he unravelled the problems which were
submitted to him.  I rapidly threw on my clothes
and was ready in a few minutes to accompany my
friend down to the sitting-room. A lady dressed in
black and heavily veiled, who had been sitting in
the window, rose as we entered.
“Good-morning, madam,” said Holmes cheerily.
“My name is Sherlock Holmes. This is my intimate
friend and associate, Dr. Watson, before whom you
can speak as freely as before myself. Ha! I am glad
to see that Mrs. Hudson has had the good sense to
light the fire. Pray draw up to it, and I shall order
you a cup of hot coffee, for I observe that you are
shivering.”
“It  is  not  cold  which  makes  me  shiver,”  said
the  woman  in  a  low  voice,  changing  her  seat  as
requested.
“What, then?”
“It is fear, Mr. Holmes. It is terror.” She raised
her veil as she spoke,  and we could see that she
was indeed in a pitiable state of agitation, her face
all drawn and grey, with restless frightened eyes,
like  those  of  some  hunted  animal.   Her  features
and figure were those of a woman of thirty, but her
hair was shot with premature grey, and her expres-
sion was weary and haggard. Sherlock Holmes ran
her over with one of his quick, all-comprehensive
glances.
“You must not fear,” said he soothingly, bend-
ing forward and patting her forearm.  “We shall
soon set matters right, I have no doubt.  You have
come in by train this morning, I see.”
“You know me, then?”
“No, but I observe the second half of a return
ticket in the palm of your left glove. You must have
started early,  and yet you had a good drive in a
dog-cart,  along heavy roads,  before you reached
the station.”
The lady gave a violent start and stared in be-
wilderment at my companion.
“There is no mystery, my dear madam,” said
he,  smiling.  “The left arm of your jacket is spat-
tered with mud in no less than seven places.  The
marks are perfectly fresh. There is no vehicle save
a dog-cart which throws up mud in that way, and
then only when you sit on the left-hand side of the
driver.”
